# Advanced Sed
The sed editor provides some advanced features that allow you to work with text patterns across multiple lines. This chapter showed you how to use the next command to retrieve the next line in a data stream and place it in the pattern space. Once in the pattern space, you can perform complex substitution commands to replace phrases that span more than one line of text.

The multiline delete command allows you to remove the first line when the pattern space contains two or more lines. This is a convenient way to iterate through multiple lines in the data stream. Similarly, the multiline print command allows you to print just the first line when the pattern space contains two or more lines of text. The combination of the multiline commands allows you to iterate through the data stream and create a multiline substitution system.

Next, we covered the hold space. The hold space allows you to set aside a line of text while processing more lines of text. You can recall the contents of the hold space at any time and either replace the text in the pattern space or append the contents of the hold space to the text in the pattern space. Using the hold space allows you to sort through data streams, reversing the order of text lines as they appear in the data.

Next we reviewed the various sed editor flow control commands. The branch command provides a way for you to alter the normal flow of sed editor commands in the script, creating loops or skipping commands under certain conditions. The test command provides an if-then type of statement for your sed editor command scripts. The test command branches only if a prior substitution command succeeds in replacing text in a line.

The chapter concluded with a discussion of how to use sed scripts in your shell scripts. A common technique for large sed scripts is to place the script in a shell wrapper. You can use command line parameter variables within the sed script to pass shell command line values. This creates an easy way to utilize your sed editor scripts directly from the command line, or even from other shell scripts.

The next chapter digs deeper into the gawk world. The gawk program supports many features of higher-level programming languages. You can create some pretty involved data manipulation and reporting programs just by using gawk . The chapter describes the various programming features and demonstrates how to use them to generate your own fancy reports from simple data.
