# Presenting Data
Understanding how the bash shell handles input and output can come in handy when creating your scripts. You can manipulate both how the script receives data and how it displays data, to customize your script for any environment. You can redirect the input of a script from the standard input (STDIN) to any file on the system. You can also redirect the output of the script from the standard output (STDOUT) to any file on the system.

Besides the STDOUT, you can redirect any error messages your script generates by redirecting the STDERR output. This is accomplished by redirecting the file descriptor associated with the STDERR output, which is file descriptor 2. You can redirect STDERR output to the same file as the STDOUT output or to a completely separate file. This enables you to separate normal script messages from any error messages generated by the script.

The bash shell allows you to create your own file descriptors for use in your scripts. You can create file descriptors 3 through 8 and assign them to any output file you desire. After you create a file descriptor, you can redirect the output of any command to it, using the standard redirection symbols.

The bash shell also allows you to redirect input to a file descriptor, providing an easy way to read data contained in a file into your script. You can use the lsof command to display the active file descriptors in your shell.

Linux systems provide a special file, called /dev/null, to allow you to redirect output that you don’t want. The Linux system discards anything redirected to the /dev/null file. You can also use this file to produce an empty file by redirecting the contents of the /dev/null file to the file.

The mktemp command is a handy feature of the bash shell that allows you to easily create temporary files and directories. Simply specify a template for the mktemp command, and it creates a unique file each time you call it, based on the file template format. You can also create temporary files and directories in the /tmp directory on the Linux system, which is a special location that isn’t preserved between system boots.

The tee command is a handy way to send output both to the standard output and to a log file. This enables you to display messages from your script on the monitor and store them in a log file at the same time.

In Chapter 16, you’ll see how to control and run your scripts. Linux provides several different methods for running scripts other than directly from the command line interface prompt. You’ll see how to schedule your scripts to run at a specific time, as well as learn how to pause them while they’re running.

## Key points:
